Let fame, that all huntafter in their lives,
Live register'd upon ourbrazen tombs
And then grace us in thedisgrace of death;
When, spite of cormorantdevouring Time,
The endeavor of thispresent breath may buy
That honour which shallbate his scythe's keen edge
And make us heirs of alleternity.
Therefore, braveconquerors,--for so you are,
That war against your ownaffections
And the huge army of theworld's desires,--
Our late edict shallstrongly stand in force:
Navarre shall be thewonder of the world;
Our court shall be alittle Academe,
Still and contemplative inliving art.
You three, Biron, Dumain,and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years'term to live with me
My fellow-scholars, and tokeep those statutes
That are recorded in thisschedule here:
Your oaths are pass'd; andnow subscribe your names,
That his own hand maystrike his honour down
That violates the smallestbranch herein:
If you are arm'd to do assworn to do,
Subscribe to your deepoaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved; 'tis but athree years' fast:
The mind shall banquet,though the body pine:
My loving lord, Dumain ismortified:
The grosser manner ofthese world's delights
He throws upon the grossworld's baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, topomp, I pine and die;
With all these living inphilosophy.
I can but say theirprotestation over;
So much, dear liege, Ihave already sworn,
That is, to live and studyhere three years.
But there are other strictobservances;
As, not to see a woman inthat term,
Which I hope well is notenrolled there;
And one day in a week totouch no food
And but one meal on everyday beside,
The which I hope is notenrolled there;
And then, to sleep butthree hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink ofall the day--
When I was wont to thinkno harm all night
And make a dark night tooof half the day--
Which I hope well is notenrolled there:
O, these are barren tasks,too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study,fast, not sleep!
Your oath is pass'd topass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege,an if you please:
I only swore to study withyour grace
And stay here in your courtfor three years' space.
You swore to that, Biron,and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, thenI swore in jest.
What is the end of study?let me know.
Why, that to know, whichelse we should not know.
Things hid and barr'd, youmean, from common sense?
Ay, that is study'sgodlike recompense.
Come on, then; I willswear to study so,
To know the thing I amforbid to know:
As thus,--to study where Iwell may dine,
When I to feast expresslyam forbid;
Or study where to meetsome mistress fine,
When mistresses fromcommon sense are hid;
Or, having sworn too harda keeping oath,
Study to break it and notbreak my troth.
If study's gain be thusand this be so,
Study knows that which yetit doth not know:
Swear me to this, and Iwill ne'er say no.
These be the stops thathinder study quite
And train our intellectsto vain delight.
Why, all delights arevain; but that most vain,
Which with pain purchaseddoth inherit pain:
As, painfully to pore upona book
To seek the light of truth;while truth the while
Doth falsely blind theeyesight of his look:
Light seeking light dothlight of light beguile:
So, ere you find wherelight in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark bylosing of your eyes.
Study me how to please theeye indeed
By fixing it upon a fairereye,
Who dazzling so, that eyeshall be his heed
And give him light that itwas blinded by.
These earthly godfathersof heaven's lights
That give a name to everyfixed star
Have no more profit oftheir shining nights
Than those that walk andwot not what they are.
Too much to know is toknow nought but fame;
And every godfather cangive a name.
How well he's read, toreason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stopall good proceeding!
Well, sit you out: gohome, Biron: adieu.
No, my good lord; I havesworn to stay with you:
And though I have forbarbarism spoke more
Than for that angelknowledge you can say,
Yet confident I'll keepwhat I have swore
And bide the penance ofeach three years' day.
Give me the paper; let meread the same;
And to the strict'stdecrees I'll write my name.
How well this yieldingrescues thee from shame!
'Item, That no woman shallcome within a
mile of my court:' Haththis been proclaimed?
Four days ago.
Let's see the penalty.
'On pain of losing her tongue.'Who devised this penalty?
Marry, that did I.
Sweet lord, and why?
To fright them hence withthat dread penalty.
A dangerous law againstgentility!
'Item, If any man be seento talk with a woman
within the term of threeyears, he shall endure such
public shame as the rest of thecourt can possibly devise.'
This article, my liege,yourself must break;
For well you know herecomes in embassy
The French king's daughterwith yourself to speak--
A maid of grace andcomplete majesty--
About surrender up ofAquitaine
To her decrepit, sick andbedrid father:
What say you, lords? Why,this was quite forgot.
So study evermore isovershot:
We must of force dispensewith this decree;
She must lie here on merenecessity.
Necessity will make us allforsworn
Three thousand times withinthis three years' space;
If I break faith, thisword shall speak for me;
I am forsworn on 'merenecessity.'
So to the laws at large Iwrite my name:
And he that breaks them inthe least degree
Stands in attainder ofeternal shame:
Suggestions are to otheras to me;
But I believe, although Iseem so loath,
I am the last that willlast keep his oath.
But is there no quickrecreation granted?
Ay, that there is. Ourcourt, you know, is haunted
With a refined travellerof Spain;
A man in all the world'snew fashion planted,
That hath a mint ofphrases in his brain;
One whom the music of hisown vain tongue
Doth ravish likeenchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whomright and wrong
Have chose as umpire oftheir mutiny:
This child of fancy, thatArmado hight,
For interim to our studiesshall relate
In high-born words theworth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost inthe world's debate.
How you delight, my lords,I know not, I;
But, I protest, I love tohear him lie
And I will use him for myminstrelsy.
Boy, what sign is it whena man of great spirit
grows melancholy?
A great sign, sir, that hewill look sad.
Why, sadness is one and theself-same thing, dear imp.
No, no; O Lord, sir, no.
How canst thou partsadness and melancholy,
my tender juvenal?
By a familiar demonstration ofthe working, my tough senior.
Why tough senior? whytough senior?
Why tender juvenal? whytender juvenal?
I spoke it, tender juvenal,as a congruent epitheton
appertaining to thy young days,which we may nominate tender.
And I, tough senior, as anappertinent title to your
old time, which we mayname tough.
Pretty and apt.
How mean you, sir? Ipretty, and my saying apt?
or I apt, and my saying pretty?
Thou pretty, becauselittle.
Little pretty, becauselittle. Wherefore apt?
And therefore apt, becausequick.
Speak you this in mypraise, master?
In thy condign praise.
I will praise an eel withthe same praise.
What, that an eel isingenious?
That an eel is quick.
I do say thou art quick inanswers: thou heatest my blood.
I am answered, sir.
I love not to be crossed.
You are a gentleman and agamester, sir.
I confess both: they areboth the varnish of a
complete man.
I have promised to study threeyears with the duke.
But I hereupon confess Iam in love: and as it is
base for a soldier to love,
so am I in lovewith a base wench.
If drawing my swordagainst the humour
of affection would deliverme from the reprobate
thought of it, I wouldtake Desire prisoner,
and ransom him toany French courtier
for a new-devised courtesy.
I think scorn to sigh: methinksI should outswear Cupid.
Comfort, me, boy: what greatmen have been in love?
Hercules, master.
Most sweet Hercules! Moreauthority, dear boy,
name more; and, sweet my child,let them be men of good
repute and carriage.
Samson, master: he was aman of good carriage,
great carriage, for he carriedthe town-gates on his back
like a porter: and he wasin love.
O well-knit Samson!strong-jointed Samson!
I do excel thee in my rapier
as thou didst me incarrying gates.
I am in love too.
Who was Samson'slove, my dear Moth?
A woman, master.
Of what complexion?
Of the sea-water green,sir.
Is that one of the fourcomplexions?
As I have read, sir; andthe best of them too.
I do love that country girlthat I took in the
park with the rational hindCostard: she deserves well.
My spirit growsheavy in love.
A letter from themagnificent Armado.
How low soever the matter, Ihope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heaven:God grant us patience!
To hear? or forbearhearing?
The matter is to me, sir,as concerning Jaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I wastaken with the manner.
In what manner?
In manner and form following,sir; all those three:
I was seen with herin the manor-house,
sitting with her upon the form,
and taken followingher into the park;
which, put together, is inmanner and form following.
Now, sir, for the manner,--
it is the manner of a manto speak to a woman:
for the form,-- in some form.
For the following, sir?
As it shall followin my correction:
and God defend the right!
Will you hear this letterwith attention?
As we would hear anoracle.
Such is the simplicity of manto hearken after the flesh.
'Great deputy, thewelkin's vicegerent and
sole dominator of Navarre,my soul's earth's god,
and body's fosteringpatron.'
Not a word of Costard yet.
'So it is,'--
It may be so: but if hesay it is so, he is,
in telling true, but so.
Peace!
Be to me and every manthat dares not fight!
No words!
Of other men's secrets, Ibeseech you.
'So it is, besieged withsable-coloured melancholy,
I did commend theblack-oppressing humour
to the most wholesome physicof thy health-giving air;
and, as I am a gentleman,betook myself to walk.
The time when. Aboutthe sixth hour;
when beasts most graze, birdsbest peck, and men sit down
to that nourishmentwhich is called supper:
so much for the time when.Now for the ground which;
which, I mean, I walked upon:it is y-cleped thy park.
Then for the place where;where, I mean, I did encounter
that obscene and preposterousevent, that draweth
from my snow-white penthe ebon-coloured ink,
which here thou viewest,beholdest, surveyest, or seest;
but to the place where; itstandeth north-north-east
and by east from the westcorner of thy curious-
knotted garden: there didI see that low-spirited
swain, that base minnow ofthy mirth,'--
Who?
Me?
'that unletteredsmall-knowing soul,'--
'that shallow vassal,'--
Still me?
'which, as I remember,hight Costard,'--
O, me!
'sorted and consorted,contrary to thy
established proclaimededict and continent canon,
which with,--O, with--
but with this I passionto say wherewith,--
With a wench.
'with a child of ourgrandmother Eve,
a female; or, for thy moresweet understanding, a woman.
Him I, as my ever-esteemedduty pricks me on,
have sent to thee, to receivethe meed of punishment,
by thy sweet grace'sofficer, Anthony Dull;
a man of good repute, carriage,bearing, and estimation.'
'Me, an't shall pleaseyou; I am Anthony Dull.
'For Jaquenetta,--so isthe weaker vessel
called which I apprehendedwith the aforesaid swain,--
I keep her as a vesselof the law's fury;
and shall, at the leastof thy sweet notice,
bring her to trial. Thine, inall compliments of devoted
and heart-burning heat ofduty.
ADRIANO DE ARMADO.'
This is not so well as Ilooked for, but the best
that ever I heard.
Ay, the best for theworst. But, sirrah,
what say you to this?
Sir, I confess the wench.
Did you hear theproclamation?
I do confess much of thehearing it but little of
the marking of it.
It was proclaimed ayear's imprisonment,
to be taken with a wench.
I was taken with none, sir:I was taken with a damsel.
Well, it was proclaimed'damsel.'
This was no damsel, neither,sir; she was a virgin.
It is so varied, too; forit was proclaimed 'virgin.'
If it were, I denyher virginity:
I was taken with a maid.
This maid will not serveyour turn, sir.
This maid will serve myturn, sir.
Sir, I will pronounceyour sentence:
you shall fast a weekwith bran and water.
I had rather pray a monthwith mutton and porridge.
And Don Armado shall beyour keeper.
My Lord Biron, see himdeliver'd o'er:
Sir, the duke's pleasure is,that you keep Costard safe:
and you must suffer himto take no delight
nor no penance; but a' mustfast three days a week.
For this damsel, I mustkeep her at the park:
she is allowed for theday-woman. Fare you well.
I do betray myself withblushing. Maid!
Man?
I will visit thee at thelodge.
That's hereby.
I know where it issituate.
Lord, how wise you are!
I will tell thee wonders.
With that face?
I love thee.
So I heard you say.
And so, farewell.
Fair weather after you!
Come, Jaquenetta, away!
Villain, thou shaltfast for thy offences
ere thou be pardoned.
Well, sir, I hope, when Ido it, I shall do it on a
full stomach.
Thou shalt be heavilypunished.
I am more bound to you thanyour fellows, for they
are but lightly rewarded.
Take away this villain;shut him up.
Come, you transgressingslave; away!
Let me not be pent up, sir:I will fast, being loose.
No, sir; that were fast andloose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if ever I do see themerry days of desolation
that I have seen, someshall see.
What shall some see?
Nay, nothing, Master Moth,but what they look upon.
It is not for prisoners to betoo silent in their words;
and therefore I willsay nothing: I thank
God I have as littlepatience as another man;
and therefore I can be quiet.
I do affect the veryground, which is base,
where her shoe, which isbaser, guided by her foot,
which is basest, doth tread.I shall be forsworn,
which is a great argumentof falsehood, if I love.
And how can that be true lovewhich is falsely attempted?
Love is a familiar;Love is a devil:
there is no evil angel but Love.Yet was Samson so tempted,
and he had anexcellent strength;
yet was Solomon so seduced,and he had a very good wit.
Cupid's butt-shaft is toohard for Hercules' club;
and therefore too much oddsfor a Spaniard's rapier.
Adieu, valour! rust rapier!
be still, drum! for yourmanager is in love;
yea, he loveth. Assist me,some extemporal god of rhyme,
for I am sure I shall turnsonnet. Devise, wit;
write, pen; for I am forwhole volumes in folio.